---
layout: post
shortnews: false
icon: newspaper-o
title:  "Spotlight on WCCI 2024 Accepted Papers"
image: /img/posts/naco@wcci.png
header:
    og_image: posts/naco@wcci.png
---


Our group got two papers accepted at this year's World Congress on Computational Intelligence (WCCI) 2024. Let’s briefly explore the two accepted works in the field of optimization and logistics.

## Understanding Optimization Frameworks

The paper "Quantifying Individual and Joint Module Impact in Modular Optimization Frameworks" by Ana Nikolikj, Ana Kostovska, Diederick Vermetten, Carola Doerr, and Tome Eftimov offers an in-depth analysis of how modules in optimization algorithms influence outcomes. By applying functional ANOVA to assess two algorithm frameworks across various configurations, the research pinpoints which modules play crucial roles in different problem settings. This insight is vital for designing more effective optimization strategies, highlighting the nuanced interplay between algorithm components and problem specifics.

## Refining Logistics Optimization

In "Cluster-centric Local Search Strategies for Enhanced Multi-Objective Logistics Optimization," Wei Liu, Thomas Back, and Yingjie Fan introduce a novel approach to tackling the vehicle routing problem with time windows. By integrating MOEA/D with K-means clustering, they propose a strategy that better balances multiple objectives in logistics. This method enhances route efficiency by considering spatial proximity and alignment, offering a new direction for optimizing last-mile delivery.

## Conclusion

Both papers contribute valuable perspectives to their respective areas, pushing forward the conversation on how we can optimize complex systems more effectively. As we absorb the insights from these studies, we’re reminded of the ongoing journey towards deeper understanding and innovation in natural computing. Congratulations to all authors for their impactful work, and we look forward to the continued evolution of these research areas.

More details on each paper will be made available as we approach the conference date.  
Follow us on <a href="https://linkedin.com/company/naco-liacs/" target="_blank">LinkedIn</a> to keep up with our latest updates and discoveries.
